The history of psychology: How we got to the point where we are today.

We can learn from the past by looking back. We can avoid the repetition of mistakes. It can provide inspiration for ideas.

This is a lecture about the 'isims' and psycholanalysis. The different schools of thought and how they've shaped how we think about psychology. 

'Psychology has a long past but only a short history' Hermann Ebbinghaus (1910) 

128 years ago- the birth of Psycholgy as a science. There are a number of different places we can pin point as the birth of psychology:

Greek philosophy - asked questions about the human mind
Philosophy, medicine, physiology, biology, computer science all intersect at some point with out understanding of the brain, mind and behaviour. These areas came along in parallel and influenced the development of psychology. 

1879 - The birth of experimental psychology Created the first experimental laboratory to study psychology-  Wundt 

1949- Boulder Conference made a decision about the way that we train psychologists. Made a decision to train new psychologists in a scientific modal using an evidence based approach. 

Where do you stand on these questions:
The Mind /body problem? 
How do we develop knowledge? Blank slate?
Nature/Nurture?
Relationship between humans and non-humans. Is there a qualitative difference between us an primates or is the difference one of degree?
Free will vs determinism?

BEFORE PSYCHOLOGY
Modern philosophers to 1879

Rene Descartes: mathmatician, physiologist, philosopher. Challenged dogma by resolving to doubt everything. 'I think therefore I am'. Mind/body duelism

The idea that knowledge is born of being able to reflect. The only thing he could be sure about was thar he doubted everything and since doubting was thinking: 'I think therefore I am'
He was a duelist- He believed in the difference between the mind and the body: there is a physical reality but also a psychic or spiritual reality. The mind/thought is immaterial. He thought the mind was in the pineal gland.

British Empiricism
John Locke and colleagues.  John Locke: (1632 - 1702)Rejected rationalist doctrine of innate ideas (Descartes); All knowledge is derived from experience, mainly sensory experience. Two sources of ideas from experience 1) sensation 2)reflection 

The mind is a blank slate. On the basis of our experiences we draw out general principals about how the world works - this is ¡®The Empiricists approach to understanding the origins of knowledge¡¯ 

David Hume (1711 - 1776): Organisation of ideas according to the laws of association: 
Laws of resemblance (similarity)
Laws of contiguity (same time and place)
Law of cause and effect (form a connection as ¡®habit¡¯ of mind built up over time
Events that are similar to each other/same time and place/one event prior to another will be associated with one and other. On the basis of these associations we are able to make sense of our experiences.

Empiricism vs rationalism
Rationalists (like Descartes) the way to knowledge is only through reason and thought; mind actively transforms sensory information. Ideas are innate, we are born with our knowledge and we develop our understanding of the world through reflections on knowledge that are drawn out from experience. Thinking and reasoning.

Empiricists (like Locke) argue that all knowledge is gained through experience; with emphasis of the method of using observations and sensory impressions to build knowledge - laws of association
We go out into the world and we gather data and on the basis of associations in that data from that we build up general principals about how the world works

The argument is that we need both:
From a psychological point of view we can see examples of both approaches. Rationalists- theoretical approach, Empiricists- empirical approach

We also need to look at the discoveries that were going on about how the brain works and brain function
19th century discoveries in pyhisiology/medicine
de-mystification of the nervous system 
Nerve function - Muller, Helmholtz - 
Muller - the speed of the neural transfer instantaneous. Helmholts- determined the speed, was able to measure something that was previously thought to be instantaneous. 
Localisation of Function - Gall, Flourens, Broca
The idea that there are different parts of the brain that operate different things. Able to successfully demonstrate that there are areas of the brain that specialised in functions

Paul Broca (1824 - 1880) Published clinical evidence: injuries to specific areas in left cortical hymesphere led to specific loss of speech production - known as Broca¡¯s area
Later Wernicke¡¯s area shown to be associated with deficits in speech comprehension 
This supported the localisation of function position

The Beginnings of psychological measurement: Psychophysics
Weber (1795- 1798; Germany)
Used the two-point threshold method to show sensitivity to touch differed across the different body (relative sensitivities of different areas of the body)
Gustav Theodor Fechner (1801-1887)
Used increased in weights to determine Just Noticeable Differences (JNDs); demonstrated judgements are relative
		
Theory of Evolution
Charles Darwin (1809-1882)
Humans have descended from animals by modification the the principals of natural selection
Change in religious and Cartesian thinking¡¯ no separation between man and animals
Examination of emotions in humans and animals¡¯ observed universality of expressions
The impact of evolutionary theory
Study of animal behaviour as model for human behaviour- influence on behaviourism
Stimulated an interest in the measurement of individual difference
Precursor to the school of functionalism
Contemporary views on evolutionary psychology


EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY
1897 to present

The birth of psychology

Emergence of experimental psychology:
Structuralism
        \ Functionalism
Early Behaviourism
                      Neobehaviourism
Cognitivism





Schools	People	Goal	Methods/key concepts	influences
Structualism	Wilhelm Wundt (1832-1920)

Edward Tichener (1867 - 1927)	Structure and consciounsness

Wanted to catalogue the conscious experience. 

molecular approach, the goal of which was to uncover the elements of consciousness

analytical introspection

molecular approach	
Functionalism	William James (1842-1910)	Purpose		
Behaviourism	Ivan Pavlov
Edward lee Thorndike (1874-1949)
John B. Watson (1878-1958)

B.F. Skinner (1904-1990)
Predict and control behaviour	Change the environment and you can change the person

animal studies


Skinnerian Behaviourism: ALL behaviour is determined by it¡¯s consequences	darwin
Cognitivism	gestalt 
Jean Piaget
Noam Chomsky	mentaliasm	neuroimaging
computer science	darwin


Wilhelm Wundt (1832-1920)
Seen as the founder of experimental psychology
Began the first journal of Psychology: Philosophical Studies (1881)
Opened up the first university based lab of psyhology at University of Leipzig (1879)
(Youtube Wundt¡¯s Complication Pendulum)
Main method was Introspection ¡®Experimental Introspection¡¯ Observings selves and experience.
Wundt was tring to understand experience - and how we catalough our experiences in the mind

One of Wundt¡¯s  notable students was Edward Tichener (1867 - 1927): Student of Wundt. Englishman who completed PhD at Liepzig. Moved to US to head to Dept of Psych at Cornell University. GOAL (like Wundt): To learn about the structure of the mind through analysing elementary conscious experience- Structuralism 

Titchener used ¡®analytical introspection¡¯. Wanted to catalogue the conscious experience. Wanted to produce a catalogue of mental elements  like the periodic table. Thought he could/had catalogued 44000 elements

Decline of structuralism partly due to criticisms of introspection as an experimental method.
Subjective. Also the very act of introspecting on an expereince changes that experiences

Structuralism was trying to understand the ¡®WHAT¡¯ of consciousness/ William James and co wanted to understand the purpose of conciseness and how it has helped us survive

William James (1842-1910) (work in 1890)
Opened small psychology lab at Harvard, but not as a research scientist

Functionalism ¡®What for¡¯ (ie. function) of mind (i.e. structures)
Consciousness evolved because it has a function, to help in the struggle for survival

Principles of Psychology 1890
Aim to examine the purpose and functions of the mind (influenced by Darwin: behaviours can be understood in terms of it¡¯s purpose without analysing its mechanisms): Functionalism

Watch Learning clip in MY psych lab

Edward Lee Thorndike (1874-1949)
John B. Watson (1878- 1958) Environment is everything. Change the environment and you can change the person
Behaviourist Manifesto (1913)
-The rejection of introspection
-Emphasis on objectivity
-Prediction and control
-Use of animals

B.F. Skinner (1904-1990)
Return to radical behaviourism
Skinner similarly emphasised observation and control
Also argued that psychological studies should only focus on objective and measurable

Skinnerian Behaviourism: ALL behaviour is determined by it¡¯s consequences


Behaviourism was dominant but there was others.

Behaviourism is the ¡®black box¡¯ approach to Psychology

The decline of behaviourism
Psychologists increasingly challenged the view that cofnitive events do not exsist
Neobehaviourism - Accept theoretical speculton about the existence of mediational variables are operationally defined and lead to testable predictions
Need to take things like motivation into account, other variables effect behaviour, not just environment

Gestalt Psychology

1910: Max Wertheimer observed a perceptual effect named the phi phenomenom (one dot or two? Two dots or one dot moving from side to side. In order to understand our perception of the experience we need to admit that whole whole experience is more than the individual elements). Contradicts Wundts and Titchener¡¯s molecular approach, the goal of which was to uncover the elements of consciousness
Gestalt psychology focuses on ¡®wholes¡¯ not parts of elements of experience, the ¡®whole is more than the sum of the parts¡¯
In order to understand perception we need to consider the whole. Understanding our perception we need to understand the context and how different people can perceive things in different ways.

Forerunners to the cognitive revolution


developmental psychologists begin to emerge
Lev Vygotsky
Jean Piaget


Noam Chomsky¡¯s (1959) challenged Skinners learning by reinforcement. Chomsky argued that Behaviourism cannot explain language leaning.
His approach has been described as Cartesian or Rationalism
Suggested that we are pre-programmed to learn grammatical rules

The cognitive revolution - 1960s
Computer science changed the way we think about human beings. A cognitive psychologiest considers humans to actively processing information coming in about the world. A lot of these theories were based on the way computers process information- serial processing. More contemporary models- connectionist model,  parallel processing of massively connected networks.

Neuro-imaging has helped enormously. Neuorscience/neuroimaging/neurogenetics have introduced new ways to observe brain processes and function



CLINICAL PERSPECTIVES

New perspectives from clinical practice

What was it like as a patient going through the different ways mental illness was treated.

Early treatment of the mentally ill:
Possession by demons
exorcision (eg trephining)
witch hunts
Early asylums still inhumane treatment (e.g. St Mary of Bethlehem or ¡®Bedlam¡¯ in London)
Improvement in treatment in 18th century (eg Pinel)
Changing views of the basis for mental illness

Precursors to Freud:
Mesmerism
Franz Anton Mesmer (1734-1815)
Viennese physician who developed a method of treatment using magnets
Mesmer came to believe that he was ¡®magnet¡¯, could draw out people¡¯s problems by touching them. 
The idea has developed into the idea that through the process of hypnotism.
Hypnotism
James Braid (1795-1860) ¡®neuro-hypnology¡¯
Ability to be mesmerised lay with the subject

While the were Structuralist trying to understand the elements of consciousness and James was trying to work out what it was for in order to survive, the behaviourists denied the notion of consciousness...

Sigmund Freud (original lectures and writings can be found at http://psychclassics.yorku.au/)
Freud brought the unconscious influence on behaviour to the fore.
Development of Freud¡¯s ideas:
Started off using hypnotise but due to recognising individual difference in ability to be hypnotised he used
free association
dream analysis

He publish and wrote a lot about ¡®the talking cure¡¯. How you need to delve into the unconscious. He also put forward the ¡®seduction¡¯ theory. He developed the Theory of personality: Id-pleasure principle Ego- reality principle Superego - morality
Developed his ideas on Psychosexul stages of development

Beyond Freud

A lot of suggestion that it¡¯s difficult to make predictions on basis on experimental observation of Id, ego and superego.
Challenged that terms are not well defined and also his ideas on sex motivations.

Carl Jung followed on from Freud¡¯s ideas, disagreed with Freud¡¯s emphasis on sexual motivation. He is credited with the idea of Collective unconscious: archetypes.
Also introversion/extroversion

At the same time as Freud there was the third force in psychology 
Humanistic Alternatives:
A ¡®third force¡¯ trying to be more positive than behavourilist and psycholanaylsis
Emphasis on humans beings as unique individuals
Focus on the positive, not the negative
Assumes humans are free to choose (not determinism)

Psychologists like Carl Rogers (1902-1987)- The beginnings of Positive Psychology
The idea that we need to set up an environment in therapy that allows the person to be their best self- Self-actualization
An environment where you can provide 
unconditional positive regard
Empathic understanding
Congruence (where you can reflect what they¡¯re thinking and feeling)
A whole range of therapies based on these ideas.


SUMMARY
Early approaches based on hypnosis, trauma and hysteria
Emerging psychological focus
Psychoanalytic ¡®talking cure¡¯ dominates
Behaviourist rival emerges
Humanistic approach as the ¡®third force¡¯
Eclectic approaches emerge, integration and re-invention


The history of Psychology really does bring out the influence of Western (Europe and America) men. Look on moodle for a complementary perspective that looks at India, China, Indigenous psychology and woman.


